---
author: Paul Evans
date: 12 April 2021
title: N-grams
---
Principal component analysis (PCA) on the basis of character n-gram
frequencies is an alternative to PCA on the basis of word or lemma
frequencies. This technique involves breaking words down into
constituent substrings of fixed length (n-grams), typically two or
three letters (bigrams or trigrams). The string "Gratian" broken
down into bigrams would be "gr", "ra", "at", "ti", "ia", "an", and
broken down into trigrams would be "gra", "rat", "ati", "tia", "ian"
(strings are lower-cased before being split into bigrams or trigrams).
After breaking the text down into character bigrams or trigrams,
PCA is then performed on the frequencies of the bigrams or trigrams
in exactly the same way as it would be on word or frequencies. Some
practitioners of stylometric analysis have conjectured that PCA on
the basis of n-grams may be particularly effective at capturing
stylistic features (e.g., word endings) of highly inflected languages
like Latin.[^1]

There is justification in the academic literature of psycholinguistics
to give an account for why stylometry based on the frequencies of
function words works, i.e., the claim, supported by experimental
evidence, that both writers and readers process function words at
a subconscious level. There is on the other hand no good theoretical
justification for stylometric analysis on the basis of bigrams and
trigrams Traditional scholars who are dubious at best about the
methodological justifiability of principal component analysis (PCA)
on the basis of word or lemma frequencies are therefore unlikely
to be persuaded by an attribution of authorship of a text exclusively
on the basis of character n-gram frequencies.

The absence of theoretical justification notwithstanding, there has
been at least one notable and well-received attribution of authorship
of a medieval text, *Beowulf*, based on PCA of n-gram frequencies.
In a 2019 paper, Neidorf, Krieger, and Yakubek present the statistical
frequency of character bigrams in the text as stylometric evidence
"consistent with the unitary authorship of *Beowulf*."[^2] The article's
finding that *Beowulf* is the product of unitary authorship supported
an argument advanced by J.R.R. Tolkien in the twentieth century,
and the study therefore attracted a significant amount of coverage
from non-specialist publications in addition to scholarly attention.

Kestemont, *et al.*, avoided using character n-grams in their
analysis of the letters of Hildegard of Binge, Guibert of Gembloux,
and Bernard of Clairvaux on the grounds that the method is highly
sensitive to orthographic inconsistencies in the sample texts. This
concern does not arise in the analysis of the *dicta* from Gratian's
*Decretum*, since all of the text samples are the work of a single
editor, Emil Friedberg, and are therefore highly (although not
absolutely perfectly) consistent with respect to orthography.

[^1]: Spaces between words count for the purpose of decomposing a
sample of text into its constituent n-grams. It is therefore
immediately apparent which n-grams represent inflectional endings
in a sample of Latin text. "um ", "us ", "is ", "tur", "ur ", "et
", "em ", "it ", "am ", and "ent" are all in the top twenty n-grams
generated by the decompostion of the *dicta* from Gratian's *Decretum*
into trigrams.

[^2]: Neidorf, L., Krieger, M.S., Yakubek, M. et al. Large-scale
quantitative profiling of the Old English verse tradition. Nat Hum
Behav 3, 560–567 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0570-1

